We're talking to Mr. Wilson.
A.N.
You've caused quite a ruckusle of this book.
And I see you getting out of town just in time for Easter.
I'm getting out of town just in time for Easter.
I don't think it really has caused any trouble, you know.
I'm not aware of any trouble.
There's a little bit of disagreement with some of the more literalists.
But there was nothing in this book which would trouble your average Christian person at all.
Which is important to point out, I think.
Yes.
Of course, you were challenged to this debate.
I was challenged to a debate by an evangelical in England called Tom Wright.
And yes, we don't have a debate.
But I hope it will be a good-humored debate.
And he has, in fact, hasn't he rushed a debate?
Well, you see, I think he was writing a book anyway about Paul, and he's topped and tailed it with the suggestion that this is a reply to my book.
Which makes good marketing sense.
Which makes good marketing sense, I suppose.
Certainly.
Is it a reply to your book?
No, it's a conversation related between...
I mean, his book is a perfectly good book, but it isn't a reply to my book, because I don't think my book is the sort of book which is setting out to have a reply.
I don't mean it's the last word, but it's not positing things which are so controversial they need replying to.
And I think that's important also, is that we don't purport to have uncovered new
Absolutely not.
It's not one of those sort of shock horror books like Holy Blood and the Holy Grail which had Jesus going off to live in the south of France with Mary Magdalene or anything of that kind.
It's really trying to distill what I've read, I suppose I've read 200 or 300 books of modern New Testament scholarship, most of which are very inaccessible to the general reader and I'm trying to distill what scholars over the last 20, 30 years have thought about this stuff.
Maybe written 25, 26 books, I guess, evenly balanced between novels?
Well, chiefly novels.
I mean, I suppose there are about 15 novels.
Okay, so how do you see this?
And even in the nonfiction and the biography, the last two books have quite specifically... Well, I mean, what happened was I was asked to write a book about C.S.
Lewis some years ago.
I was a decade ago and one of the things that struck me was how delicate and sensitive Lewis was as a literary scholar and he urges his readers all the time don't suppose when you pick up a book that's written in the past that you'll be able to understand it at once going into the past is like going into a foreign country and you need to learn its language but when he comes to write his reliefs books he seems to forget that advice
and I was dismayed by re-reading Lewis's religious books I found them so crudely argued it made me want to go and re-discover all the stuff for myself I got interested in it and that was that was how the Jesus book and the Paul book That's a very disappointment in what Lewis does It was a terrible disappointment because he wasn't a scholar in that area he just became a kind of
Evangelical from Belfast, which is what he was in origin.
And I mean, that's a strange thing, but we've all read William James' Psychology, Varieties of Religious Experience, and religion is not a rational part of the brain, it's what happens to the irrational part of ourselves.
And we say this on a day,
that 39 people killed themselves to join up with the spaceship.
Exactly.
They wanted to destroy their containers, as they call the bodies.
They absolutely made it.
To pack their little suitcases with their driver's license in case they were needed in outer space.
I found their website, by the way.
Oh, you found it?
It's off.
I'll tell you how to get it, if you're interested.
I don't have the...
Machinery, I'm afraid.
Well, even at home, you don't have it.
No, too bad.
But you can get it through the Washington Post site, WashingtonPost.com, and then they will... I went through the whole thing this morning.
And this is amazing.
Yeah, well, there's an intelligence over there, and there's ability.
I mean, just the technical ability of creating a site like this with this graphic stuff.
Well, they clearly were very skilled with computers, weren't they?
I mean, they...
That was what they did professionally.
That's what they did professionally.
But then if you read the text, they say that Marianne was here.
I mean, they were absolutely giving you their suicide note on the internet as a group.
That was shocking.
It was one of the most chilling experiences like that.
And one of the frightening things which I... It is pertinent to what we're talking about, if you don't mind.
No, it's highly pertinent, because I think there's this extraordinary distinction, which
If you're outside a religious child, you can make between statements which can be taken as literally true and statements which you can see are really metaphorical, even if the speaker doesn't realize they're metaphorical.
And what so often happens when you get inside a religious mindset is that that distinction becomes blurred.
I'm sorry.
I didn't expect really good coffee.
Oh, she is.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I'm sorry.
That's great.
So, I mean, that's really right.
You're quite right.
I mean, I actually, well, we can talk about that right away, but I do want to get some quotes on the book.
So, Jesus came out of Lewis?
Jesus came very much out of Lewis.
I mean, there's a phrase in one of Lewis's books where he says that there was a man going around in Palestine.
2,000 years ago, claiming to be God.
Now, either that man was telling the truth, in which case we've got to worship him, or he was a liar and a lunatic.
Which do you choose?
And that remark is so crude.
I mean, it suggests total ignorance in the way that the Gospels evolved over many, many years, how they were written down years after Jesus lived, how they were written from the point of view of faith, and so on.
I mean, it's just an astonishing remark.
And yet, when I go about doing radio chat shows or
talkings or phonyers with a literal people quote that to me all the time evangelical Christians they obviously haven't begun to make that intellectual journey which I mean okay it's not surprising some of them haven't but it is amazing that Lewis had not begun to make that journey so once you do of course I think it's very exciting there's no reason to to regard all this stuff as totally destructive
Well, did you see what you were doing as a collective?
No, I didn't.
It simply inspired my own thing.
And did you expect to make new discoveries?
No, I didn't.
I did know enough about the subject.
I studied it in college.
I did know enough about the subject to realise that there isn't anything new here.
What there is new, I think, in the last 10 or 20 years,
is the extent to which scholars have drawn over all this stuff again, and related the New Testament to Jewish literature.
I mean, that's the really new thing that's happened.
Do you think, I did an interview with Robert Fagles a couple of weeks ago, and I don't know if you've had a chance to read his Odyssey or his Iliad.
I've got the Iliad, and I've bought the Odyssey, but I haven't had a chance on it.
It's wonderful, but he says, and I think we all agree, that every generation needs its own...
It's a sad day, even if it's on Shakespeare.
Do you feel the same way with the stories?
I think that's probably true.
And I think certainly every generation needs to look at a figure like Paul, because he's a difficult man to pin down.
I mean, I think everybody makes up their own Jesus.
So it's important to remind yourself where Paul is coming from.
And each generation can see different lights and different perspectives on him.
But as Fagel said, you know, when he's translating, it's inescapable.
I'm writing, I'm doing this in the 1990s, and I have to have James Joyce here, you know, and everything that implies.
And the Greek over here, and I quote, take my idiom, and I stretch it to its limits, and I take his idiom and stretch it to its limits, and I hope that I'll get something
And do you feel that you're doing a similar kind of thing?
Yes, I mean, the whole thing is a matter of translation.
I mean, that's what particularly doing this Paul book has been struck by, that it is literally a matter of translation to start with, because all the concepts with which Paul was dealing with start out as Aramaic and
Hebrew concepts and he's a Greek speaker and a Greek thinker and he's taken him out into the Mediterranean world as soon as he's done that as soon as he's taken a word like Mashiach and called it Christ that's a very subtle shift semantically but it's an enormous shift by the time you've taken it to Corinth or somewhere like that where they don't know anything about the Jewish messianic tradition where they know a lot about demigrants where they've heard about Heracles going down into the underworld and coming up again
and then of course it's an act of translation in the sense that as you were talking about 20th century man or late 20th century man has got to go back and learn the whole mindset of the first century which is only a semi-possible thing to do of course you're bound to fail but unless you try then I don't think you're going to see what the nature of the difficulty is reading an ancient text
Do you enter this as a scholar, as a biographer, as a novelist, as a literary critic, as somebody with an agenda, so to speak, with an open mind?
And again, let's follow the progression from Lewis to Jesus to... I think I've tried to enter it with an open mind.
It's a very difficult thing to do, then.
Because we don't really have open minds.
There is no such thing as an open mind.
Wouldn't it surprise me if you told me?
There's no such thing as an open mind, but thinking of incidents such as we are today in Santiago, and probably, I mean, that's a very, very extreme case, but probably almost every week something in church in the world makes you think religion does very funny things to the mind indeed.
And that doesn't mean one wants to abolish it, or that it should be resisted, but one should be aware of that.
And similarly, probably having non-religious views.
But I... I was trying to approach all this stuff with as open a mind as possible.
To see what kind of sense it made.
After all, I mean, he's been a fantastically influential man, Paul.
It's not so, if I'm just choosing someone, it's your figure.
It being... I mean, you said it made... Christianity.
Okay, that's... With a capital I. Yes.
Okay, yeah.
I'm sorry to interrupt you, go ahead.
No, but I mean, that was really the aim of the book.
It wasn't, I don't think I wrote it with an axe to grind.
I certainly wasn't writing it in all its approval point, all its approval point.
So how about the suggestion that this is iconoclastic and blasphemous, which I've read in a few, you know, British publications?
I think that's just ridiculous.
There is very, very little here in this book.
In fact, nothing that you wouldn't have heard in any theological seminary or
religious knowledge for the last hundred years.
There's nothing new here.
Casey suggests you're a heretic, which is quite a choice of... Oh, John Casey in the English paper.
Yes, well, I mean, that's okay.
I don't mind being a heretic, but I'm sure I am by some people's standards.
You see, even that question is an interesting one.
How much can a
a Christian who's been through all this stuff.
I'm rather detached from religious belief myself at the moment, but how much do the committee Christians accept all this?
And I don't see any intellectual reason why they shouldn't accept the kind of approaches that you find in my book.
We had a very interesting radio discussion in Chicago a couple of days ago with two professors from Chicago University.
the divintist ruler one of whom was a Roman Catholic the other of whom was Protestant they were entirely accepting of the kind of things the civic rights were about entirely that's in fact I mean one of them who was in fact a Christian minister was much more extreme than I was I mean he didn't think we could really know anything at all certainly historically about
Jesus, for instance.
And he didn't think that any of the Christian literature really gets going until the second century.
And that if we read Paul in his original context, we probably wouldn't even think of... I mean, I don't think Paul was a Christian in the modern sense.
But he didn't think... He thinks of Paul simply as a Jewish herity.
And of course, did you point out that Paul didn't consider Jesus the...
Well, Paul doesn't use the word Christianity.
He uses the word Christ, but he uses the word Christ as a development of the word Messiah.
And that's all he's talking about.
He's talking, in the first instance, he's talking to Jews about Judaism.
And then when they reject what he says, he begins to talk to Gentiles.
But even talking to Gentiles, he's talking about what he believes to be the truth and secret of Judaism.
why is it significant that his father is a tent maker?
I don't think it is significant particularly even if it's true it's certainly true that he undertook a trade because he writes about that in his letters but he doesn't spell out very much what it is and Luke tells us he was a tent maker there are several inferences you can draw from that one is if he was a tent maker
who was he making the tents for, and a German astrologer, Martin Hengel, argues quite convincingly that Paul's father was making tents for the Roman legionaries.
This puts you, if you're a first century Jew, even a Jew of the diaspora, not in an ambivalent position, but in a position which is very different from the Palestinian Jews like Jesus.
Because it means that you are very much accepting the political status quo, the existence of the empire, the existence of the soldiers.
And it also, I mean, if you were thinking absolutely strictly, although there were Jewish temptations and leather workers, there's nothing wrong with it.
When you actually get to the business of tanning the hide, you're...
you're in danger there of getting corpse pollution and corpse impurity which would need special purification rituals so in other words Paul is one of those many many Jews the Jews of the diaspora greatly outnumbered the Jews of Judea and Galilee and they I mean the Alexandrian ones
more or less plateness, and they, no more Jews in Alexandria than there were anywhere else in the Mediterranean at that time.
It was sort of New York.
I actually wouldn't let Alexander here in my own court.
They were all coming to terms with things, and the whole situation was much more pluralist and much more fluid and complicated.
some people sometimes realize and they think there's one thing called Christianity and one thing called Judaism who will hop from one to the other.
Well, the book reads beautifully.
I don't have to wonder, I think I know the answer, but I wonder if you can express for me the importance of narrative in human fiction.
You are telling a story here, I believe.
I think I'm telling a story.
It's rather hard to put it in.
I mean, yes, it's very important for me that a book should read fluently.
And I suppose, I mean, I am primarily a novelist, so that if this book has a fault, it is perhaps that I'm trying to fill in the gaps between areas which we don't know anything about.
And is there a temptation there to wager the head of the novelist?
Yes, there is.
And I hope that I've ladled all those bits in the book quite clearly.
That we are making imaginative leaps.
We are making imaginative leaps.
I mean, such as whether Jesus and Paul never sit eyes upon one another.
I don't think there's any harm in making imaginative leaps.
As long as you identify.
So telling the story is... When you set out... I mean, what is it, four or five biographies now?
It's Holstoy one, of course.
Again, it's...
It's not just documenting a life, in your view, I would guess.
No, it's not.
It's not.
And I think probably in terms of actual technique, I don't make much distinction between writing fiction and writing nonfiction.
I think probably, I think, I mean, in terms of the actual architectonics of the book, I plan it out, whether it's fiction or nonfiction.
Obviously, the planning in each case is going to be very different, because in fiction I'm dreaming is half in non-fiction, I'm doing research.
But when it actually comes to writing it, I certainly do want it to have a beginning, a middle, and an end.
Just an hour ago, I had an interview with a woman, Anne Michaels, a novelist from Canada, an excellent book called Future of Jesus.
But she's a poet, you know, and the first young, 38 years old,
Very interesting.
I mean, how often do you interview a poet?
Usually it's the other way around.
It's a novelist who aspires poetry.
And we're discussing the same kinds of, the same concepts.
Again, it does come out of narrative, doesn't it?
And of course, it's really searching
getting lost in finding perfect work.
You know, get yourself mired in your book.
I mean, you've got to work here.
You've got to keep your eye on the ball, as we say here in baseball.
You've got to keep your eye on the ball.
Otherwise, if you lose it, then the reader loses it.
It seems while we're done, I'm not asking you a lot of questions about the book.
It doesn't seem nice at all to me.
Okay, good.
That's my job to read the book.
No, no.
I'm very happy with the word.
Oh, good.
You'll see, I write these literary essays that draw from my reading of the book and then from this little interaction.
And I do have 25 newspapers in largely university towns, so they'll love this.
This is perfect for my readers.
from Eugene, Oregon to Salt Lake City, Charlottesville, Boston, Columbus.
It's perfect.
I heard you were coming here.
It's quite great.
I had the opportunity to chat.
No, it's wonderful to meet you.
I want to read your Alexandra, but what's it?
Well, did you notice I'm wearing a bobbly tie today?
Oh, yes, I can see it.
I wore this for you.
I said, my goodness, this is an Oxford scholar.
My book really isn't about Alexandria.
It's about bibliomania.
It's about 2,500 years of... Oh, how wonderful.
It's the great library of Alexandria.
And there's another bit of bibliomania.
Precisely, yeah.
This was my second trip up just two weeks ago.
What a marvelous subject.
It's called The Gentle Madness.
I should write it in my cart.
No, I should very much like it.
It's a very interesting book.
I think if you give me your address, maybe I'll have my publisher send you a copy.
sixth printing now, I'm pleased to say.
That's wonderful.
Who is your publisher?
Holt.
Henry Holt is the publisher.
Oh, yes.
The book was shortlisted last year for the National Book Critic Circle Award.
I had a chapter in there, Rule of Retirement, and we still never met a British publisher.
How do you figure that?
I'm told that it's very hard to sell a 638-page book to a market.
It's amazing.
If it's a book,
the general phenomenon of Biblio mania.
I'm amazed you have... I'm amazed, really, because it is.
The title of the book is A Gentle Madness Called Bibliophiles, Bibliomanes, and the Eternal Passion for Books.
And half is history, and then the other half is journalistic, just documenting these very interesting stories over the last 30 years or so.
The Great Book Thief of Biblio.
There were a lot of British resonances to it.
But anyway, that says neither here nor there.
Oh, it's a wonderful story.
I am just definitely going to get rid of a child.
What I'll do is I'll get some friend in New York to... Well, if you give me your card, I'll be happy to have... I don't have a child, but I'll write it down.
I'll be happy to have sent you one.
I'll write it down here.
I'll be writing it right there.
Okay.
Because... I'm sorry, you don't mind chatting around like this, do you?
Well, they don't have parents.
I've been talking about this all week.
My job is to read the book, it seems to me.
I did an interview with Robert Coles a couple of months ago in this new book.
And of course, he believes, and he's a psychiatrist for children, and he's written a Miss Tolstoy, one of his great heroes.
And he says that he always loves to use stories.
in his classes and with children, and he said when he was a child, his mother said, you have to have stories that you can live your life by.
Do you agree with that?
Yes.
I'm writing a new book now, by the way.
I mean, one of my novels, well, in fact, several of my novels have really dealt with this sort of thing.
I've written a sort of five volume, no,
The final one which came out this spring, I think, was it last year?
But, I mean, the central one of that actually has a character who's obsessed by this theme of the myths that we live by and the stories that we live by.
Which is, of course... It's called Daughters of Albion.
And... It's one of my really pet themes.
I mean, this is why...
This is why Julian was so fantastically popular in the ancient world, not just to... Do you mind talking about this at another time, by the way, too?
I mean, now, but if I contact you... No, no, I'd love to talk about it.
I'm coming back for further research.
But maybe... This is a meditation of book culture in the years of a new millennium.
Book places, libraries, book people.
books of the future, libraries of history, the canon wars, the readers, all kinds of stuff.
It's a very nice idea, isn't it?
It's getting... I actually get something out of this Hale-Walk thing.
This really gets me.
I've been studying computers.
I don't want to hear this on tape.
I have to transcribe this one.
I really make a tremendous parallel between what happened with these people and the Unabomber.
It's always chilling, you know.
Are you familiar with the Unabomber story?
The guy who, the big story that we had last year, the guy who was blowing people up with a letter bomb?
Oh, yes, yes, yes, yes.
Extraordinary story.
And as far as I'm concerned, it's the first time in history where somebody's book was published
under the threat that if you don't publish my book, I'm going to continue to kill people.
And he did.
And what was he railing against?
Technology and computers.
And he lived in a shack and he typed in an old typewriter.
And how did he get caught?
By the computer.
His brother read this manifesto on a computer and his brother recognized him.
Now you go just to the flip side, you have these
People who make their livelihood from computers and who actually communicate by computer.
This guy was killing other people.
Who do they kill?
They killed himself.
I don't know.
I haven't made a connection to him yet, but it's really something there.
And it's technology.
And of course, the other guy was alive.
I mean, and he was brilliant.
And they're all brilliant, by the way.
This is also very interesting.
That is very interesting, yes.
They are all brilliant, because, I mean, you need high imagination to develop some of these nutty ideas.
And that's a really scary thing.
But you're talking about the little novel in here.
Yes, but I mean, it just comes into that, the idea of the stories by which people live.
I mean, reverting to your psychology strength.
You continue to be a literary editor, is this correct?
I've just...
Actually doing that up.
Okay.
I'm still doing some journalism on the Evening Standard.
But how is it, how do you feel about books?
If I were to tell you, for instance, a major university, Ivy League University, I've discovered this one, has been ordered by their trustees to reduce the size of their collections from 6.8 million to 6 million by the year 2000.
Now, not only are they going to cut 800,000 books out of their collections... That means that they're not going to be buying a new one.
It also means that they're going to these things.
If you put it simply like that, then I would be chilled... I'd be chilled by that, and I would think that is terrible.
And the days of Philistinism and darkness are upon us, but if, as I do,
or as I did for the last seven years, you sit in an office in the Evening Standard in London, and you watch how many novels are published in England alone each week.
I think it's something like 500 a week.
I think England does 90,000 titles a year, which is more than... 90,000 titles a year.
That was David Brantman who told me that it would be great.
You might believe that, you see.
And an awful lot of it is absolutely rubbish.
Full of it.
It wouldn't be worth a university.
When you think that the copyright libraries, the Library of Congress, British Library, the Library in Dublin, whatever it's called, National Library of Ireland, or Trinity, it's Trinity Library, isn't it?
But they are obliged to take every single one of those volumes.
That's right.
It's only the Library of Congress here.
Because as I say, the Library of Congress.
No, I'm not taking a short word.
I mean, some kind of judicious
the garbage would seem to make sense, but on the other hand it seems for this time it seems sad for those of us who are all bookmen, but not only that but you do find now uh Nicholson Baker the San Francisco thing which is written about the New Yorker and that's just one element that he found that the San Francisco Library was very quietly getting rid of books, but that's fine a lot of people it's not fine, but a lot of libraries have been doing it but they're old books.
and I've gotten a few of these titles.
You'd be amazed at how many of these books we've got the titles.
That's probably only, there are only two or three copies of these left in libraries in the United States, and we can just determine this online.
It's all online now, so you can read library 10 books.
You can basically determine
You can quite specifically determine, I've done it.
They've shown it to me.
They've punched up my book.
I know exactly which libraries in Ohio will have it and how many copies they have.
You can just, you know, run this out.
People are maybe unknowingly getting rid of the last book in many instances.
So I'm dealing with this.
This is absolutely fascinating stuff.
It's interesting, isn't it?
Yeah.
It's fun.
I honestly don't know where it's going just yet.
I didn't know where it's fun.
I mean, I know what I'm doing.
But when I talk to a book man, I love to just...
see what you think this isn't touching my book it's just in brackets one of the things that's happening with Christianity and if you had to say what is Christianity most people would think Christianity was the religion of the book just as Judaism and Islam is but in fact it was very much an oral tradition and a cult around certain rights particularly the Eucharist years and years before
Anybody who thought of writing is all done.
And really it's only when it gets written down.
And when it gets gathered into a written canon, probably 200 years after it writes, that it becomes something that you can define.
And then this sort of orthodox can start past choosing the heretics and all hell from the letter.
And it turns into a different ballgame altogether.
Do you consider yourself and England with
canon awards that are similarly going on here.
You mean things like the Harold Linden book on the Jacqueline?
Yes, very much so.
For instance, you can get a degree.
I have evidence of, I told this to Fabian, he knew a lot, because he graduated summa cum laude from Amherst College.
Amherst College graduated, summa cum laude graduated.
I was going to say the same.
Okay.
Just to let you know.
25 minutes.
Well, let's give us a few more minutes.
You don't mind, do you?
No, no.
In English, not literature, English, literature, and this individual never took a course in Shakespeare, Milton, Chaucer, Trident, and was granted not only a degree in English literature, but was graduating summa cum laude.
That bothers me.
It bothers me, and I was...
wholly on Bloom's side.
I interviewed him for this new book, by the way.
I thought it was a terrific book.
Yeah.
But of course, all this sort of thing goes on in England and in Europe, just as might have been done in the United States.
But it's politically driven.
That's what bothers me.
Is it the same?
Yeah, it's atrocity.
Of course it is.
And it's the same insidious, but it's like they're behind it, maybe.
Do you find the same battles going on in the universities?
I think that, I wish they did, but I mean, in a lot of English universities, there isn't a battle.
They've given up.
There was just a big story in the globe about this professor at BU who wrote in the T.S.
Eliot book, and he's been forced to resign from the English department because of his very conservative views on what English literature is.
I'm dealing with that.
Well, it's just fascinating to us.
Oh, you gave me your address.
Okay.
Can I have a phone number?
Do you mind?
Why don't I light you?
Write me.
It's better to write me.
And if you'd inscribe this book for me, I'd be delighted.
Give me a pen.
If I could have a pen, yes, please.
I have one.
This is ink.
That's terrific.
This is good.
I'm so angry.